===========================================================
DefCore Committee Fall 2016 Interoperability Issues Report
===========================================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents

About This Document
--------------------
OpenStack is tremendously flexible, feature-rich, powerful software that can be
used to create clouds that fit a wide variety of use cases including software
development, web services and e-commerce, network functions virtualization
(NFV), video processing, and content delivery to name a few.  Commercial
offerings built on OpenStack are available as public clouds, installable
software distributions, managed private clouds, appliances, and services.
OpenStack can be deployed on thousands of combinations of underpinning storage,
network, and compute hardware and software.  Because of the incredible amount
of flexibility OpenStack offers and the constraints of the many use cases it
can address, interoperability between OpenStack clouds isn't always assured:
due to various choices deployers make, different clouds may have some
inconsistent behaviors.

One of the goals of the DefCore Committee's work is to create strong
interoperability standards so that end users of clouds can expect certain
behaviors to be consistent between different OpenStack Powered clouds and
products.  As the DefCore Committee has gone about it's work of defining
Interoperability Guidelines over the past few years, it has encountered various
barriers to interoperability among OpenStack Powered clouds.  The DefCore
Committee seeks to work with the rest of the OpenStack Community to reduce or
eliminate these barriers and recognize work that is being done to promote
interoperability for end users of OpenStack Powered clouds.

To that end, the DefCore Committee has chosen to create a biannual report
that highlights a few key interoperability challenges that the Committee has
identified in the course of creating it's Interoperability Guidelines.  This
report is not intended to be a comprehensive listing of all barriers to
interoperability among OpenStack clouds--rather, it seeks to call out a small,
actionable subset of those barriers to highlight their importance and direct
the community's focus toward discussing and resolving them.  This report is
also not intended to be critical of the work of OpenStack developers: it's
intent is to communicate feedback that the DefCore Committee has received
constructively so that the the issues are known to the Technical Committee
and project teams so that the software can be improved.  The report also
highlights known issues so that OpenStack deployers are aware of some choices
they make when deploying OpenStack, and so that end users of OpenStack clouds
are aware of some of the issues they may face when working with different
OpenStack clouds.

The issues highlighted in this report are listed in no particular order,
as their importance is different to different users and use cases.

This report is intended to be periodically updated so that we can report on
new issues that arise and progress being made on existing issues.  We intend
to publish a new version of the report approximately twice annually.

This report is not intended to prescribe or mandate solutions to
interoperability problems.  Often, changes to the OpenStack software may be
used to resolve interoperability issues, and while the DefCore Committee is
generally happy to engage in creating solutions, technical governance is not
the domain of the DefCore Committee or the Board of Directors.  Rather, this
report is intended to inform the Technical Committee and Project Teams about
issues so that they can take action as they see fit.

Finally, the DefCore Committee would like to take this opportunity to thank
the OpenStack community for it's continued attention to interoperability
issues.  We congratulate OpenStack on it's progress toward becoming the
ubiquitous Open Source Cloud Computing platform that is easy to use, simple
to implement, interoperable between deployments, works well at all scales,
and meets the needs of users and operators of both public and private clouds.

About The DefCore Committee
----------------------------
The OpenStack DefCore Committee was formed during the OpenStack Icehouse Summit
in Hong Kong by a Board of Directors Resolution on November 4, 2013.  DefCore
sets base requirements by defining 1) capabilities, 2) code, and 3) must-pass
tests for all OpenStack products.  This definition uses community resources
and involvement to drive interoperability by creating the minimum standards
for products labeled "OpenStack."  For more information about the DefCore
Committee, please refer to the following resources:

* The `Core Definition
  <http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/doc/source/process/CoreDefinition.rst>`_
  document describes the DefCore Committee's guiding principals.
* The `2015B Process document
  <http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/doc/source/process/2015B.rst>`_
  describes some of the DefCore Committee's operating procedures.
* The `Core Criteria document
  <http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/doc/source/process/CoreCriteria.rst>`_
  describes the criteria the DefCore Committee uses to evaluate Capabilities
  for inclusion in it's Interoperability Guidelines.
* The `DefCore Lexicon <http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/doc/source/process/Lexicon.rst>`_
  defines some of the terminology the DefCore Committee uses, including some
  terms that are used in this report.
* The `OpenStack Interoperability page
  <http://www.openstack.org/brand/interop/>`_ describes the logo/trademark
  programs that the DefCore Committee's Interoperability Guidelines govern
  admission to.

You can communicate with the DefCore Committee via email at
defcore-committee@lists.openstack.org, or on IRC in the #openstack-defcore
channel on freednode.net.

Issue 1: Testing Interoperability
----------------------------------

In order for OpenStack Powered clouds to prove that they behave consistently,
the DefCore Committee requires that certain tests be successfully run against
the cloud or product in question.  These tests are listed in the DefCore
Committee's Interoperability Guidelines.  To date, all of the tests that the
DefCore Committee has selected for it's Guidelines are maintained by the
OpenStack Community in Tempest [1]_.  Since no formal interoperability program
existed prior to the DefCore Committee's creation, in some sense the decision
to use Tempest tests as the basis of interoperability testing put Tempest
tests in the position of being "used in a new way" compared to the use cases
they were originally written for.  The introduction of a new way to use
Tempest has surfaced some design choices that were made that are better
suited to the "traditional" uses for Tempest (such as CI testing at the
development gates) than for interoperability testing.

One example of such an issue is implicit test requirements.  For instance, a
test might be written to test that Nova can boot an instance using the v2 API.
In order to boot an instance, a user must first have an image stored in Glance
to boot from.  OpenStack provides several different ways to create a bootable
image, not all of which may meet DefCore Criteria [2]_ for inclusion in an
interoperability Guideline.  For example, the Glance v1 API may not be
available to all users of some clouds since although v1 is "SUPPORTED", v2 is
the "CURRENT" version of the Glance API. [3]_  Some clouds may disallow
uploading an image by policy and only allow users to use the Glance task API.
If the test for booting an instance also attempts to create an image to boot
using a method that doesn't meet DefCore Criteria, the passing the test
effectively requires that a cloud support a Capability that the DefCore
Committee did not intend to require.

As a second example, Interoperability Guidelines may cover releases that are
commonly deployed and used in commercial products but are no longer tested in
the upstream CI gate due to the branches having reached end-of-life in the
development community.  Because Tempest has traditionally focussed it's
efforts on non-EOL branches, changes may be made to the tests that make them
unable to be used against older releases.

As a third example, DefCore has chosen to only include tests in it's
Guidelines that can be repeated by end users of clouds in order to ensure that
end users can verify whether or not a cloud they're considering using is
in fact interoperable with others.  This constraint means that tests that
require administrator credentials are unsuitable for Interoperability
Guidelines, since end users of clouds typically don't have administrative
privileges.  Some tests use administrative credentials for reasons of code
efficiency (for instance, a base class might use administrative credentials
because some tests that use it may genuinely need them, while others do not).

Because not all existing tests are suitable for inclusion in Interoperability
Guidelines, the DefCore Committee has at times been unable to include
a Capability in the Guidelines in spite of the Capability meeting the
DefCore Criteria.  As a result, users of OpenStack Powered clouds are unable
to rely on those Capabilities to be present and functional.

The DefCore Committee recognizes that using existing tests for a new purpose
may sometimes require tests to be refined or even for new tests to be written.
In order for good interoperability tests to be developed, the DefCore
Committee has `created a specification
<http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/working_materials/DefCoreSpec.rst>`_
that discusses what traits we look for in a test that is suitable for inclusion
in the Interoperability Guidelines.  It is our hope that this listing will help
foster awareness and understanding within the development community as tests
are created, updated, or moved into Tempest over time.

.. [1] Notably, in 2016 the Technical Committee passed
    `a resolution
    <https://governance.openstack.org/resolutions/20160504-defcore-test-location.html>`_
    indicating it's preference that DefCore use tests in the Tempest source
    tree for it's Guidelines.
.. [2] Refer to the
    `Core Criteria
    <http://git.openstack.org/cgit/openstack/defcore/tree/doc/source/process/CoreCriteria.rst>`_
    document for more details.
.. [3] As of this writing.  Refer to the
    `OpenStack API Complete Reference <http://developer.openstack.org/api-ref.html>`_
    for more information.


Issue 2: Varying Models for API Evolution
------------------------------------------

API's are a very important contact point between the OpenStack software and
end users: whether they're using one of OpenStack's own clients, a third
party management tool, or an SDK developed outside of the OpenStack community,
they all end up using OpenStack's API in some way.

OpenStack also has a very diverse community of projects under the Big Tent in
various stages of development: some have been around since the beginning of
OpenStack and have mature, fairly stable API's.  Others are new and evolving
quickly and may iterate on their API's faster.  Some projects have moved to
a microversioning model [4]_, others haven't.  Some projects that have gone
through major-version API changes over time have elected to continue supporting
older versions of their API for long periods, while others have chosen to
deprecate and remove older versions of their API relatively quickly.  At times,
announced plans to make modifications to which API's are CURRENT, SUPPORTED,
and DEPRECATED have changed, and feedback we've received indicates that
communication around API changes isn't always clear and consistent to
parties outside of the OpenStack ecosystem (for example: developers of third
party SDK's and tools that don't regularly read posts on the high-volume
openstack-dev@lists.openstack.org mailing list and may not regularly attend
project IRC meetings).  API transitions for projects that depend on one another
with OpenStack aren't always handled uniformly: sometimes one project continues
to call an older version of another project's API for quite some time after
a newer version is released [5]_.  Some "tribal knowledge" has also developed
within OpenStack over time: for example API's that OpenStack developers
themselves say should only be used internally by other OpenStack services and
shouldn't be exposed to end users (documentation of which may be scant or
non-existent).

OpenStack has and wishes to maintain a rich ecosystem of tools that consume
OpenStack's services but are developed outside of OpenStack itself, and
many users of OpenStack clouds depend on this ecosystem [6]_ when developing
applications for OpenStack clouds.

Differences in how OpenStack projects handle API transitions and in how
transitions and plans are communicated to the outside world at times make
it difficult to know when external tools need to be updated.  For example,
some external toolkits may be surprised when an API becomes deprecated quickly
for one project after observing another project maintain older versions of an
API indefinitely.  They may rely on an API version being exposed to end users
that many clouds don't actually expose.  Updating external tools and clients
requires real time and effort from their maintainers, so some may be reluctant
to move to a newer API version unless it's very clear to them that there is
added value in doing so or that they absolutely need to because the version
they're currently using is being removed.

When API's become inconsistently adopted either within OpenStack or among
external tools, those inconsistencies are often reflected in certain
capabilities failing to meet DefCore's Criteria.  For example, if many
third party SDK's are split between supporting Glance v1 and Glance v2,
those individual API's may have trouble achieving the "Used by Tools"
criteria.  If OpenStack's own clients and other projects keep relying on
an older API, the new API may be unable to achieve the "Used by Clients"
and "Foundation" criteria.  If API's are iterated quickly between versions of
OpenStack or only some clouds disable a particular version of an API from being
consumed by end users, the API may be unable to achieve the "Widely Deployed"
criteria.  Failing to meet Criteria means that a capability can't be introduced
into an Interoperability Guideline since it is not, in fact, interoperable.

.. [4] For example, refer to
    `Nova's Microversions documentation
    <http://developer.openstack.org/api-guide/compute/microversions.html>`_.

.. [5] As an example, the Glance v1 API was moved from CURRENT to SUPPORTED status
    in the spring of 2015 in the Kilo release.  Nova will continue to depend
    on the v1 API until the Newton release in the fall of 2016.  Refer to
    the Nova `Add support for Glance v2 API Spec
    <https://specs.openstack.org/openstack/nova-specs/specs/newton/approved/use-glance-v2-api.html>`_
    for more information.

.. [6] Refer to page 22 of the
    `April 2016 User Survey
    <https://www.openstack.org/assets/survey/April-2016-User-Survey-Report.pdf>`_
    for examples, a few of which include libcloud, FOG, jclouds, Terraform, and
    clients that users wrote themselves.

Issue 3: External Network Connectivity
---------------------------------------

Networking is a complex topic by it's very nature: different use cases or
organizational constraints may demand different network models.  OpenStack
in turn provides a great deal of flexibility in networking, with several
models available in Neutron.  For many users of clouds, the ability to
get a compute instance connected to the outside world is a particularly
important capability.  For example, a popular use case for OpenStack is
"web services and e-commerce" [7]_.  E-commerce platforms generally feature
some webserving instances that need publicly routable IP addresses so that
customers can reach the site.  Another popular use case is
"Software dev/test/QA and CI", and many continuous integration systems need to
pull packages and software updates from repositories outside of their own
networks.

OpenStack provides many options for getting external connectivity to compute
instances: in some cases, users create a private network and use floating IP's
to get to the Internet.  In others, users must attach instances that they want
to be reachable from the public Internet to a specific administratively-created
provider network.  In other cases, instances are booted onto a default network
that provides external reachability by default.

Unfortunately, the differing network models that OpenStack provides for also
introduce some complexity for clients and app developers: the method they use
to get external reachability differs from cloud to cloud.  Discovering the
correct method can be complicated, and is often done by reading documentation
provided by the cloud administrator rather than programatically.  Once the user
discerns the correct methods for each cloud they want to use, they are
still often forced to complicate their code with if/else loops or similar
constructs because of the varying models in use:

.. code:: python

  if cloud == 'Cloud A':
      # The IP address we were given at boot time is public; do nothing.
  elif cloud == 'Cloud B':
      attach_floating_ip_to_instance(myinstance)
  elif cloud == 'Cloud C':
      attach_instance_to_network('c8c43765-53cf-4030-a115-a89471ded2ed')


Because making an instance externally reachable is such a common need and
because the networking models used by deployers differ so greatly, this is
a particularly challenging issue for end users.

.. [7] Refer to page 35 of the
    `April 2016 User Survey
    <https://www.openstack.org/assets/survey/April-2016-User-Survey-Report.pdf>`_.

Issue 4: API and Policy Discoverability
----------------------------------------

OpenStack frequently offers more than one method to accomplish a given end-user
objective.  For example: a user wishing to create an image might call Nova's
API to make an image of a currently running instance, or she might upload an
image through the Glance v1 API, the Glance v2 API, or they might use an import
task.  All of these methods create an image, but all are different API calls.
In most cases the mechanics are very different and are intended for different
use cases, and in some cases the use cases are similar but the API calls are
different (e.g. using a similar API call to the v1 endpoint vs the v2
endpoint). Further, most OpenStack projects offer policy controls that can be
configured by cloud administrators: for example, a cloud administrator might
disable the Glance v1 API for end users or might only allow image creation via
the task API (or indeed may not allow image creation at all, and instead
restrict users of the cloud to images created by administrators).  Further
still, some capabilities may be exposed to some users of clouds (for example,
project administrators) but not others (project members).

Discovering which capabilities and methods are available and accessible to
end users can be a somewhat frustrating exercise that often amounts to trial
and error:

.. code:: python

  def create_image(image, cloud)
      '''Create an image in a cloud.'''
      try:
          create_image_via_glance_v1_upload(image, cloud)
      except ApiNotAvailableError:
          try:
              create_image_via_glance_v2_upload(image, cloud)
          except UnauthorizedError:
              try:
                  create_image_via_glance_import_task(image, cloud)
              except:
                  print "I can't or don't know how to create an image in this cloud"


Some external tools and SDK's simply assume that certain capabilities are
available to all users which causes frustration for users of clouds in
which those capabilities are not available to them.  The varying policy
settings and API versions available among differing clouds coupled with the
differing adoption of methods among clients may cause some Capabilities to not
meet DefCore's Criteria.

In most cases, the versions of particular API that are are discoverable via a
GET request to the root URL of an API endpoint (though in some cases a client
may also need to check microversion headers if the project is known to use
microversions).  In some cases there is not test coverage for the
discovery API in Tempest, which limits DefCore's ability to add tests for the
discovery API to an Interoperability Guideline.  Policy is often trickier to
programmatically discover as policy files are only available to cloud
administrators.

The issue of discoverability also impacts what tests can be included in
Interoperability Guidelines in another way: some tests assume that particular
methods of accomplishing an end-user objective are available, and rely on
them to set up for the capability they actually want to test.  Drawing on
the example above, a test for the ability to boot an instance in Nova might
need to create an image to boot, and might assume that Glance v1 is both
supported by the cloud and available to the unprivileged user running the test.
As per Issue 1 described previously in this document, if that method isn't
actually interoperable, the test for booting an instance may be excluded from
an Interoperability Guideline even if booting an instance is actually
an interoperable capability.  If the test instead had a way to discover how the
cloud allowed the user to create images and implemented that method as part of
it's fixture, the test would be more likely to be suitable for inclusion.

Issue 5: Lack of Clarity on DefCore's Purpose and Abilities
------------------------------------------------------------

Although the DefCore Committee was initially created almost three years ago,
the program has taken some time to evolve it's operating procedures and develop
Guidelines that had enough required Capabilities to be genuinely useful as
decision-making tools for consumers of OpenStack clouds, vendors
designing products or services built on OpenStack, prospective customers of
those products and services, and the tooling ecosystem.  Over that time there
has been much discussion about what the DefCore Committee's role is.  For
example, some feedback we've received indicates that there is some sentiment
that the DefCore Committee can "bless" a capability by including it in an
Interoperability Guideline based on whether or not the Committee members feel
that all clouds should support the capability.  In fact, most of the DefCore
Criteria are trailing indicators of whether or not a capability has become
widely adopted throughout the ecosystem.  The DefCore Committee also does
not mandate technical decisions for projects such as when an API should be
deprecated, how or if a capability that has been deemed not interoperable must
be improved or replaced, or how Tempest tests should be designed.  Technical
governance of OpenStack's development instead resides with the projects
themselves and ultimately with the Technical Committee.

The logo programs [8]_ that Interoperability Guidelines govern admission
to are designed to be simple.  They allow a product or service built on
OpenStack to use an logo that indicates it is interoperable.  The logo is a
very easily recognizable mark that indicates some base level of interoperable
functionality is available, and is thus easy for consumers of OpenStack clouds
to look for.  However, users must dig a bit further to really understand which
Capabilities are actually interoperable.  A list of Capabilities and required
tests are published with each Guideline, but the tests may not easily map to
particular API's that users are interested in using.  Users may also need to
compare different Guidelines to determine differences in the Capabilities
covered if they are concerned with clouds that have demonstrated compliance
with different Guidelines.  Even armed with a list of tests, users may require
that some Capabilities not covered by the Guidelines be present in products
that they choose to use--and there's currently no good way for them to
determine which products support those Capabilities.

.. [8] Refer to: http://www.openstack.org/brand/interop/


Concluding Remarks and Acknowledgements
----------------------------------------

The DefCore Committee hopes that this report is informative and useful in
directing attention to current interoperability challenges.  We believe that
focussing attention on these issues will ultimately lead to a more
interoperable ecosystem for OpenStack users.  We believe that the OpenStack
ecosystem strongly desires interoperability among clouds, and congratulate
OpenStack on progress already being made toward fostering greater
interoperability among OpenStack clouds.  We look forward to sharing updates
on these issues and more in future reports.

In particular, the DefCore Committee would like to gratefully acknowledge the
feedback and engagement we've received from:

* The OpenStack Foundation and it's Board of Directors
* The Technical Committee
* The User Committee
* Providers of products and services built on OpenStack
* The RefStack project team
* PTL's and project teams who contributed to identifying interoperable
  Capabilities and working to improve the interoperability of their projects
* The OpenStack QA team for it's assistance in refining tests
* End users of OpenStack who've provided feedback and frank conversation

Without the participation of such a broad swath of our community, this report
and indeed most of the DefCore Committee's work would not be possible.  **Thank
you for your support.**

If you wish to provide feedback or engage the DefCore Committee in other ways,
please contact us at defcore-committee@lists.openstack.org.
