Process Cycles
==============

Defining OpenStack Core is a long term process and we are doing the work
in progressive cycles. For reference, we have named the cycles. This
helps describe concrete deliverables for a cycle while allowing
discussion of the broader long term issues. For example, we may say that
"item X is important to DefCore but out of scope for Elephant." We have
found that this approach to breaking down the problem is necessary to
maintain community consensus because we are taking smaller bites of the
larger challenge (aka eating the elephant).

Spider (Fall 2013)
------------------

Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~

* Find a consensus approach to moving forward on DefCore

* Define process by which Core will be defined

Elephant (Spring 2014)
----------------------

Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~

* If needed, change the bylaws to reflect the Spider Core Principles

* Establish the "must-pass" tests, processes and tools

* Define tests that will be used to determine core based on Spider
cycle work

* Lower the water in the discussion to expose broader issues

* Clearly identity "elephants" that we are not ready to resolve in this cycle

Meetings
~~~~~~~~

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreElephant.2

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreElephant.3

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreElephant.4

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreElephant.5

Lighthouse (Fall 2014)
----------------------

Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~

* Complete Capabilities Score for Havana (Advisory), Icehouse and
Juno

* Recommend by-laws changes for winter voting

* Launch refstack site for data collection and sharing

Meetings
~~~~~~~~

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreLighthouse.1

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreLighthouse.2

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreLighthouse.3

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreLighthouse.Bylaws1

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreLighthouse.F2F

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreBylawsIPE

Scale Cycle (Spring 2015)
-------------------------

Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~

* Capabilities for I & J

* Process approved by TC & Board

Process Meetings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.1

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.2

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.3

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.4

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.F2F

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.5

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.6

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.7

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.8

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.9

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.10

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.11

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.12

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.13

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.14

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.15

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/DefCoreScale.16

Capabilities Meetings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-jan-28-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-feb-04-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-feb-18-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-mar-04-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-mar-11-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-mar-25-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-apr-01-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-apr-08-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-apr-15-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-apr-22-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-apr-29-2015

* https://etherpad.openstack.org/p/defcore-capabilities-may-13-2015

Flag Cycle (Spring - Summer 2015)
---------------------------------

Objectives
~~~~~~~~~~

* Improve and clearly document the test flagging process.

* Ensure that DefCore/RefStack can include tests that are not run via Tempest.

* Determine a path forward for components with overlapping capabilities
  (such as networking).

Meetings
~~~~~~~~
Meeting information for the Flag cycle will be archived here once the cycle
is complete.  During the cycle, please refer to the
`DefCore Committee wiki page <https://wiki.openstack.org/wiki/Governance/DefCoreCommittee/>`_.

Future
------

Names to be decided when we get there. Topics that
are intentionally pushed into the future:

* OpenStack API Mark
